doc: matter: Added memory profiling guide. (#16683)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/protocols/matter/getting_started/memory_optimization.rst

   You can read the ``Heap allocated bytes`` value to learn about the current peak usage.
   In addition to heap statistics, you can also obtain other information about the Matter stack from this command.

#. Perform some operations on your device.
#. Read again the current peak values, and calculate a difference of the current ``Heap allocated bytes`` value and the value read in step no. 2.

Non-Volatile Storage (NVS) Settings usage
-----------------------------------------

You can measure the NVS usage by monitoring peak and current usage.
To do this, you need to set the following in your application :file:`prj.conf` file:

.. parsed-literal::
   :class: highlight

    CONFIG_SHELL=y
    CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MATTER_SETTINGS_SHELL=y
    CONFIG_SHELL_MINIMAL=n
    CONFIG_SETTINGS_SHELL=y

The NVS Settings usage may change during the device's lifetime.
The ``settings_storage`` partition can only be changed by reflashing the Matter device.
This means that it cannot be altered through DFU (Device Firmware Update).
Because of this, you need to be careful when setting the partition, and should allocate some free space to ensure that it can accommodate more data in the future.

> The data used within this partition may increase with updates to Matter and |NCS|.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data used within this partition may increase with updates to Matter and the |NCS|.
```

If this functionality is enabled, you can use :ref:`ug_matter_configuring_settings_shell`.

To see the full list of available commands, use the following UART shell command on your device:

.. code-block:: console

    uart:~$ matter_settings

You will see a list of the available commands like this one:

.. code-block:: console

    peak      : Print peak settings size in Bytes. This size is reset during
              reboot.
              Usage: matter_settings peak
    reset     : Reset peak settings size in Bytes.
                Usage: matter_settings reset
    get_size  : Get size of the chosen settings entry.
                Usage: matter_settings get_size <name>
    current   : Get current settings size in Bytes.
                Usage: matter_settings current
    free      : Get free settings space in Bytes.
                Usage: matter_settings free

Similarly to heap measurements, you can reset the current peak usage value, read the peak value, perform some operations on the device, and read the peak value again to obtain the difference.

> 1. Reset the peak usage value, use the following UART shell command on your device:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Reset the peak usage value:
```

   .. code-block:: console

      uart:~$ matter_settings reset

> #. Measure the peak usage, use the following UART shell command on your device:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Measure the peak usage:
```

   .. code-block:: console

      uart:~$ matter_settings peak

#. Perform some operations on your device.

> #. Measure the peak usage again and and calculate a difference of the current peak value and the value read in step no. 2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Read the current peak usage again using the ``matter_settings peak`` command again.

   The difference between the current peak value and the value in Step 2 shows the peak usage.
```
I think this is still correct when worded this way.

> Apart from that ``matter_settings`` commands allows you also to read the current value of Zephyr settings usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``matter_settings`` command also allows you also to read the current value of Zephyr settings usage.
```

> To read it from the device use the following UART shell command on your device:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To read it from the device, use the following UART shell command on your device:
```

.. code-block:: console

   uart:~$ matter_settings current

> You can also read a specific settings entry size by calling ``matter_settings get_size <name>`` UART shell command on your device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also read the size of a specific settings entry by calling the ``matter_settings get_size <name>`` UART shell command on your device.
```

> To obtain the name of an entry, you can use the ``settings list`` command form the ``settings`` UART shell command set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To obtain the name of an entry, you can use the ``settings list`` command from the ``settings`` UART shell command set.
```

> To read a specific settings entry size complete the following steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To read the size of a specific settings entry, complete the following steps:
```

> 1. Read all available settings list:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. View the list of all available settings:
```

    .. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ settings list

    .. code-block:: console

        mt/g/im/ec
        mt/g/gdc
        mt/g/gcc
        mt/g/lkgt
        mt/ctr/reboot-count
        mt/cfg/unique-id
        its/0000000000020001

> #. Choose one of the available key, for example ``mt/ctr/reboot-count`` to read size of the reboot counter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Choose one of the available keys, for example ``mt/ctr/reboot-count`` to read size of the reboot counter.
```

#. Read the size of the chosen key:

    .. code-block:: console

        matter_settings get_size mt/ctr/reboot-count

> To learn about other ``settings`` UART shell commands use the following UART shell command on your device:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn about other ``settings`` UART shell commands, use the following UART shell command on your device:
```

.. code-block:: console

    uart:~$ settings

> You will see subcommand description like following one:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will see subcommand descriptions like the following:
```

.. code-block:: console

    settings - Settings shell commands
    Subcommands:
    list    : List all settings in a subtree (omit to list all)
            Usage: settings list [subtree]
    read    : Read a specific setting
            Usage: settings read [type] <name>
            type: string or hex (default: hex)
    write   : Write to a specific setting
            Usage: settings write [type] <name> <value>
            type: string or hex (default: hex)
    delete  : Delete a specific setting
            Usage: settings delete <name>

.. note::

>    The :ref:`ug_matter_configuring_settings_shell` provides only the peak value of the current settings usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The :ref:`ug_matter_configuring_settings_shell` provide only the peak value of the current settings usage.
```
Link target heading is plural.

   To estimate the space needed for the ``settings_storage`` partitions, gather the size of each settings key and decide how often the value is updated during the device's lifetime.

Stack usage for all threads
---------------------------

You can measure the stack usage by monitoring peak usage of each thread stack.
To do this, you need to set the following in your application :file:`prj.conf` file:

.. parsed-literal::
   :class: highlight

    CONFIG_SHELL=y
    CONFIG_KERNEL_SHELL=y

You can also measure the peak stack usage of each thread running on the Matter device.
This measurement can help in setting the proper stack size value and saving RAM space for other stacks or the heap.

To see all statistics for each running thread, use the following UART shell command on your device:

.. code-block:: console

    kernel stacks

> You will see the similar statistics as following ones, the number of threads may be different:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will see statistics similar to the following ones, although the number of threads may be different:
```

    0x20006e18 openthread                       (real size 4096):	unused 3432	usage  664 / 4096 (16 %)
    0x20007be8 ot_radio_workq                   (real size 1024):	unused  848	usage  176 / 1024 (17 %)
    0x20006768 shell_uart                       (real size 3200):	unused 2104	usage 1096 / 3200 (34 %)
    0x20002580 nrf5_rx                          (real size 1024):	unused  832	usage  192 / 1024 (18 %)
    0x2000d510 sysworkq                         (real size 1152):	unused  880	usage  272 / 1152 (23 %)
    0x20007b10 MPSL Work                        (real size 1024):	unused  808	usage  216 / 1024 (21 %)
    0x2000d3a0 idle                             (real size  320):	unused  272	usage   48 /  320 (15 %)
    0x2000d458 main                             (real size 6144):	unused 4584	usage 1560 / 6144 (25 %)
    0x20025d00 IRQ 00                           (real size 2048):	unused 1120	usage  928 / 2048 (45 %)

You can read the peak usage measurement for each thread and learn about the total size of the stack, and unused bytes.
You can adjust the stack values for your application using estimations based on these measurements.

Configuring memory usage
========================

> Most of the Matter samples in the |NCS| have a safe configuration that assumes a high number of free space for heap, stacks, and settings partition size

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most of the Matter samples in the |NCS| have a safe configuration that assumes a high number of free space for heap, stacks, and settings partition size.
```

After measuring the memory usage, you may want to adjust the memory parameters according to your project's requirements.

The following sections present a guide on how to adjust specific maximum memory values.

Settings usage
--------------

.. important::

    The ``settings_storage`` partition can only be changed by reflashing the Matter device.
    This means that it cannot be altered through DFU (Device Firmware Update).
    Because of this, you need to be careful when setting the partition, and should allocate some free space to ensure that it can accommodate more data in the future.

>     The data used within this partition may increase with updates to Matter and |NCS|.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The data used within this partition may increase with updates to Matter and the |NCS|.
```

To adjust the settings usage, you need to modify the :file:`pm_static` file related to your target board.

> For example, to modify the ``settings_storage`` partition in the Matter Template sample for the ``nrf52840dk_nrf52840`` target, complete the following steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, to modify the ``settings_storage`` partition in the :ref:`Matter Template <matter_template_sample>` sample for the ``nrf52840dk_nrf52840`` target, complete the following steps:
```

> 1. Locate the :file:`pm_static_nrf52840dk_nrf52840.yml` in the Matter Template sample directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Locate the :file:`pm_static_nrf52840dk_nrf52840.yml` in the sample directory.
```

#. Locate the ``settings_storage`` partition within the ``pm_static`` file.

   For example:

   .. code-block:: console

       settings_storage:
           address: 0xf8000
           size: 0x8000
           region: flash_primary

#. Modify the ``size`` value.

> #. Align all other partitions to not overlap any memory regions.
>    To learn more how to configure partitions in the :file:`pm_static` file see the :ref:`partition_manager` documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Align all other partitions to not overlap any memory regions.

   To learn more about how to configure partitions in the :file:`pm_static` file, see the :ref:`partition_manager` documentation.
```

#. Align the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SETTINGS_NVS_SECTOR_COUNT` Kconfig option value to the used NVS sectors.

>    Each target in |NCS| Matter samples uses 4 kB NVS sectors, so you can divide the ``settings_storage`` partition size by 4096 (0x1000) value to get a number to be written as the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SETTINGS_NVS_SECTOR_COUNT` Kconfig option value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Each target in |NCS| Matter samples uses 4 kB NVS sectors, so you can divide the ``settings_storage`` partition size by 4096 (0x1000) to get the value you need to set for the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SETTINGS_NVS_SECTOR_COUNT` Kconfig option.
```

> To learn more about partitioning see the :ref:`ug_matter_device_bootloader_partition_layout` guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn more about partitioning, see the :ref:`ug_matter_device_bootloader_partition_layout` guide.
```

+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| CHIP                | :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_TASK_STACK_SIZE`                    | Matter thread stack.                                           |
|                     |                                                                  | For example, all functions scheduled to be execute from        |
|                     |                                                                  | the Matter thread context using                                |
|                     |                                                                  | the ``SystemLayer().ScheduleLambda`` function.                 |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| openthread          | :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_OPENTHREAD_THREAD_STACK_SIZE`            | OpenThread thread stack.                                       |

> |                     |                                                                  | (Matter over Thread only).                                     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|                     |                                                                  | For Matter over Thread only.                                   |
```
Looks better in the built documentation.

| BT TX               | :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_HCI_TX_STACK_SIZE`                    | Bluetooth LE transmitting thread stack.                        |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| nrf5_rx             | :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_IEEE802154_NRF5_RX_STACK_SIZE`           | Bluetooth LE receiving thread stack.                           |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| BT RX WQ            | :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_RX_STACK_SIZE`                        | Bluetooth LE processing thread stack.                          |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| ot_radio_workq      | :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_OPENTHREAD_RADIO_WORKQUEUE_STACK_SIZE`   | IEEE 802.15.4 radio processing thread stack.                   |

> |                     |                                                                  | (Matter over Thread only).                                     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|                     |                                                                  | For Matter over Thread only.                                   |
```

+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| net_mgmt            | :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NET_MGMT_EVENT_STACK_SIZE`               | Zephyr network management event processing thread stack.       |

> |                     |                                                                  | (Matter over Wi-Fi only).                                      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|                     |                                                                  | For Matter over Wi-Fi only.                                    |
```

+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| wpa_supplicant_main | :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_WPA_SUPP_THREAD_STACK_SIZE`              | WPA supplicant main thread.                                    |
|                     |                                                                  | Processing Wi-Fi requests and connections.                     |

> |                     |                                                                  | (Matter over Wi-Fi only).                                      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|                     |                                                                  | For Matter over Wi-Fi only.                                    |
```

+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| wpa_supplicant_wq   | :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_WPA_SUPP_WQ_STACK_SIZE`                  | WPA supplicant work queue thread.                              |
|                     |                                                                  | Processing Wi-Fi task queue                                    |

> |                     |                                                                  | (Matter over Wi-Fi only).                                      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|                     |                                                                  | For Matter over Wi-Fi only.                                    |
```

+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| nrf700x_bh_wq       | :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF700X_BH_WQ_STACK_SIZE`                | nRF700x Wi-Fi driver work queue.                               |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| nrf700x_intr_wq     | :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NRF700X_IRQ_WQ_STACK_SIZE`               | Interrupts processing generated by the nRF700X Wi-Fi radio.    |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| mbox_wq             | :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_IPC_SERVICE_BACKEND_RPMSG_WQ_STACK_SIZE` | Inter Processor Communication.                                 |

> |                     |                                                                  | (for multi-processors targets only).                           |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|                     |                                                                  | For multi-processors targets only.                             |
```
